Preface

It is now two years since Professor Georg Sverdrup entered into the joy of his Lord. His day of labor in this land extended over a period of thirty-three years. Throughout all this time he worked diligently and untiringly, with mouth and pen, for the quickening and liberation of mankind. During these years he took part in an exceedingly long series of contributions to the various ecclesiastical and churchly questions that stirred men’s minds.

The feeling of the heavy loss and the bitter sense of deprivation gradually found expression among many in this wish: If only he had still had time to review and publish, in collected form, a selection of what he had made public in the course of the years, and likewise to revise and publish his theological lectures! — But for this he had no time. He was worn down by labor, felt himself one day more than ordinarily unwell, and the next morning the flag of mourning waved over the school to which, for a generation, he had devoted his best powers.

When the deceased’s son, Professor George Sverdrup, Jr., requested me to take steps to collect and, if possible, publish a collection as complete as might be of the departed teacher’s writings, I did not think it right to decline, although I already then felt something of the responsibility connected with it and foresaw the difficulties it would entail.

It already presented its difficulties to find the material. A large part of what Professor Sverdrup wrote appeared in the form of treatises and articles in our religious periodicals. But there are very few who have sufficient interest and forethought to preserve such papers from year to year. There are, however, one or two who have kept these old journals, and it is through them that I have succeeded in finding—so far as I am aware—all that has ever been published from Professor Sverdrup’s hand. To all those who in this way have rendered this work such valuable service, I herewith express my heartfelt thanks.

The preliminary result of the material thus collected is presented here as the first volume of a work whose final extent has not yet been determined, but which is at any rate intended to comprise at least five volumes.

As regards the publication, it is proper to call attention to the fact that no changes have been made except those of a purely orthographic and linguistic nature. I have believed it right, as far as possible, to make use of the form of language that was common before the very latest radical changes in our spelling, and which the author himself employed in the last years before his death. Thus all plural verb forms have been removed, etc. As concerns citations from the Old Testament, I have followed the translation that has been in use for many years, the so‑called “new translation,” whereas the author is seen in his citations to have used what was then the newest translation, namely the so‑called “Ryve translation.”

On the other hand, I do not consider it advisable that, in a work such as this, principled changes should be undertaken—something for which, moreover, there has been no ground whatsoever in the present volume. There may arise a question as to whether a treatise should be included or not; but there can be no question of altering a man’s words when one no longer has any opportunity to ascertain how he himself, in such a case, would have altered them.

As to whether the introductory remarks that accompany each section, and the annotations added as notes beneath the text, are of any value, that will be for the kindly reader to judge. My concern has been, if possible, to make everything clear; and I have sought to avoid any danger of misleading. The notes beneath the text that are not marked “—Ed.” (the Editor) are by the author himself.

To the many—both my colleagues at Augsburg Seminary and others—who by counsel and suggestion, and by the interest they have shown in this work, have rendered me valuable help and encouragement, I herewith express my best thanks. In particular, Professor Wilhelm Petersen deserves thanks for the kindness he has shown in attempting an introduction to the work, as well as Professor J. S. Blegen for the many valuable suggestions he has given me again and again.

The portrait of Professor Sverdrup that accompanies this volume is his last, and was taken a few weeks before his death. His signature is a facsimile of his name as written on one of the diplomas he signed the day before his death.

I can only wish that this collection of Professor Georg Sverdrup’s writings may find so kindly a reception that our highly esteemed and deeply missed teacher, and our people’s and our church’s faithful friend, may through it continue to speak to us and to the generation that comes after us.

In a better way we could perhaps scarcely honor the memory of Professor Georg Sverdrup.

Augsburg Seminary, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May 3, 1909.

Andreas Helland.
