“All hands on deck; draw the sword from its sheath; let the cannons flash in the sun; strike upon the souls, so that the clang of weapons may be heard far across the land. The time has come; the air is heavy with thunder; let
the thunder roll in the clouds and the lightning strike flash upon flash in the darkness of the night. The powers of the world are stirring; let the powers of heaven stir within us. God’s Church is in danger; let armed men defend it. Against falsehood we wield sharp swords; against falsehood we bear gleaming helmets; against falsehood we take up shining shields. But falsehood is not outside God’s Church, but within its walls. Therefore awake, O Christian Church, wherever you may be; therefore awake, O watchman of Zion, and sound the trumpet, that it may give a clear note. This is the falsehood: that Christ is dead; for behold, he lives. This is the falsehood: that Christianity is pure doctrine and the understanding of the intellect and the clarity of thought; for behold, it is the life of love and the folly of love. This is the falsehood: that the Church is an institution meant to rule over human beings; for behold, it is the home of freedom and a fellowship of the liberated. This is the falsehood: that the Church must use the world’s deceit and fraud in order to be cunning like a serpent; for behold, it is the holy witness of truth and simplicity. This is the falsehood: that the world is the Church’s most dangerous enemy; for behold, it is the object of God’s love. This is the falsehood: that the Church is pure; for behold, it is full of corruption and stench. This is the falsehood: that Christianity is the world’s hatred; for behold, it is the world’s love. This is the falsehood: that the Church must fear the world; for behold, the world has been overcome. This is the falsehood: that the Church must go outward to find its life; for behold, its enemy is in its midst. Let us find him where his work is among us; let us know him for who he is. Let us meet him as Christ once did: I am he whom you seek.”

“The truth in love” was perhaps as much as anything an expression of the whole direction of Professor Sverdrup’s spirit.

For such a man there was scarcely room in Norway in the seventies. But with the elasticity of spirit that was his own, he soon made himself at home with the thought of working among his people outside Norway. It is not the intention here to portray the profoundly world-embracing character of Sverdrup’s understanding of Christianity and church work in contrast to that which prevailed in Norway at the time. He himself has portrayed this in masterly fashion in Memories from Norway, a work that must always form the point of departure for a fuller historical account of the reasons that brought Oftedal and Sverdrup to America. The justification of this understanding, and the correctness of these reasons, are testified to clearly enough by the subsequent ecclesiastical development in Norway.