All that remains is, in brief outline, to characterize the position into which Professor Sverdrup necessarily came when he thus tore himself away from the mother soil and “chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God” than to hold a comfortable position in a state church in which, according to his ecclesiastical convictions, he could not feel at home.

This position was essentially the same for the two men whose names in Norwegian-American church history are so closely bound together that it is possible to separate them only in a purely formal sense. Confronted with the emerging church life in the new land, these two men stood searching for a way to move beyond the old-fashioned, purely institutional conceptions. And both of them, with the burning zeal and driving force of youth, threw themselves into the work of building—indeed, we may just as well say founding—the Church upon the congregation.

This word, which together with freedom and spirit has been so terribly abused, casts light upon all the work that constitutes the key to understanding all the views that bear the name Augsburg Seminary. It was a struggle on all sides that these two men undertook and carried on. That they should be regarded as disturbers of the peace, as dangerous men, was something anyone familiar with similar historical phenomena must have expected. Nor did they in any way attempt to seek shelter from the attacks that were directed against them from so many and varied quarters. That, moreover, only served to focus attention upon them all the more sharply. But it is neither too early nor too hasty—nor yet too late—to say here that these two men, whatever else may be said of them, represented an ecclesiastical vision and an ecclesiastical work that history has sanctioned.

Here it suffices to point to the writings of Professor Sverdrup that lie before us, which as clearly as any human presentation can express it contain two things: dissatisfaction with, and the inadequacy of, the old modes of thought and inherited forms; and the advocacy of a free and living congregation as the only foundation—both biblically and historically sound—for the building of a true kingdom of God on earth. For this Professor Sverdrup labored and fought; for this he suffered and died; and no one shall deprive him of the honor of having kindled a light in the Church upon which, even to this very day, many still look with joy and gratitude.