\section{Introduction}

By Wilhelm Petersen.

—

My first attempt to portray Professor Georg Sverdrup’s life\footnote{Professor Georg Sverdrup. A biographical sketch} was written under the strong influence of the recent loss caused by his sudden death, and without any preparation other than the state of mind into which this naturally placed me, and without any other material to work with than the information I either myself possessed or could easily procure. It was a fluent and imperfect, yet nevertheless sincere and well-intentioned attempt to honor the man whom Augsburg and Kristiania without hesitation place in the foremost rank among the greater spirits and fine, well-formed personalities of the Norwegian Lutheran Church.

A worker of the Church—indeed, a man of the country who is deeply loved—whatever position he may occupy, provided he accomplishes something of real worth, has in his lifetime two difficulties to contend with. The first is that his person, his character, his gifts, his spiritual orientation, and his view of life are, and by the nature of the matter must be, misunderstood and misinterpreted, distorted and unjustly judged by those who happen to be his opponents. Certain traits in an opponent can of course always be acknowledged; but it is almost always the purely formal or phenomenal aspects, that which appears on the surface, such as courage and bravery, aggressiveness and fearlessness in the struggle itself, skill and perseverance in conducting it, strong will and energy, and whatever else belongs to all that which outwardly gives the struggle its purely phenomenal character. To the same category of one-sided and inadequate judgment belongs, naturally, also the overestimation by admirers, supporters, and devotees of the person and his distinctive gifts. There are always fundamental features in a struggle, and it often brings forth certain powerful traits in those who fight. There is always more or less spiritual agitation, which causes the conflict to be viewed from a distance and the judgment to become unjust.

